# Leveraging Host Whole Transcriptome Sequencing Data for Microbiome Studies: Comparative Analysis with 16S rRNA Sequencing and Evaluation of Preprocessing Steps 

This repository contains the data and scripts (.sh, .rmd) to reproduce the analysis in the original paper. To reproduce the analysis, following the steps below.

## Data access

The 16S rRNA sequencing dataset is publicly available and can be accessed through R package HMP2Data. The whole transcriptomics data can be downloaded as controlled-access sequences from the Genotypes and Phenotypes database (accession number: phs001626). 

## Data preparation

The script to get whole transcriptome sequencing (WTS) derived abundance table and the corresponding summary statistics are in /FASTQ_Processing/. The WTS-derived abundance table and the corresponding meta data should be stored in /raw data/ for later processing. The WTS-derived abundance table used in the manuscript is available upon request. 

## Run Rmarkdown code

- Run P1_Data_preprocessing.Rmd to pre-process the abundance tables and get Raw, Matched, Filtered, and Normalized datasets.

- Run P2_Data_structure_visualization.Rmd to get descriptive statistics comparison of abundance tables.

- Run P3_Diversity.Rmd to compute alpha and beta diversity and get visualization results for comparison.

- Run P4_DA.Rmd to get differential abundance analysis (DAA) results. Note you need to specify the contrast. And make sure you have the /DAResults/ folder to save the results for visualization.

- Run P5_DA_visualization.Rmd to visualize the DAA results for comparison.

## Folder structure for reproducing the results

../Figures/ # for storage of comparison figures generated by the .Rmd code.

raw data/

P1_Data_preprocessing.Rmd

P2_Data_structure_visualization.Rmd

P3_Diversity.Rmd

P4_DA.Rmd

P5_DA_visualization.Rmd

DAResults/

 └──CDUCvsNonIBD
 
 └──IBDvsNonIBD
 
